Annotations
===========
In this directory we save the *__raw outputs__* of APPRIS per gene.


Directory structure
===================
This directory contains the following subdirectories:

```
{APPRIS_version}
        |
        |___ {species_name}
                    |
                    |__ {datasource_version}
                                |
                                |__ {chromosome/gene_id subdirectories}
                                                |
                                                |__ {APPRIS_output_files}
```

APPRIS output files
===================
The following files are the raw outputs for a gene generated by APPRIS.

* [pipeline.ini](#pipeline-ini)
* [annot.gtf](#annot-gtf)
* [pannot.gtf](#pannot-gtf)
* [transc.fa](#transc-fa)
* [transl.fa](#transl-fa)
* [cdsseq.fa](#cdsseq-fa)
* [firestar](#firestar)
* [matador3d](#matador3d)
* [matador3d2](#matador3d2)
* [spade](#spade)
* [corsair](#corsair)
* [thump](#thump)
* [crash](#crash)
* [proteo](#proteo)
* [appris](#appris)
* [appris.nscore](#appris-nscore)
* [appris.label](#appris-label)
* [log](#log)

pipeline.ini
------------
Config INI file with the parameters of pipeline.

annot.gtf
---------
Exon features of the gene in GTF format.
> __Note:__ Optional output. It is generated when the input of pipeline has exon features.

pannot.gtf
----------
CDS features of the protein in GTF format.
> __Note:__ Optional output. It is generated when the input of pipeline has exon features.

transc.fa
---------
Nucleotide sequences of transcripts in FASTA format.
> __Note:__ Optional output. It is generated when the input of pipeline has exon features.

transl.fa
---------
Amino-acid sequences of protein-coding transcripts in FASTA format.

cdsseq.fa
---------
Amino-acid sequences of transcripts divided by CDS in FASTA format.
> __Note:__ Optional output. It is generated when the input of pipeline has exon features.

firestar
--------
Output of *__firestar__* method.

matador3d
---------
Output of *__Matador3D__* method.
> __Note:__ Optional output. It is generated when the input of pipeline has exon features.

matador3d2
----------
Output of *__Matador3D2__* method (version 2 of **Matador3D**).

spade
-----
Output of *__SPADE__* method.

corsair
-------
Output of *__CORSAIR__* method.

thump
-----
Output of *__THUMP__* method.

crash
-----
Output of *__CRASH__* method.

proteo
------
Output of *__PROTEO__* method.
> __Note:__ Optional output. It is generated when we have already annotations from proteomic data. For the
moment, only for the human gene set of GENCODE/Ensembl.

appris
------
Output of *__APPRIS__* with the scores for all methods and the final annotation.

appris.label
------------
Output of *__APPRIS__* with the labels for all methods and the final annotation.

appris.nscore
-------------
Output of *__APPRIS__* with the normalize scores for all methods and the final annotation.

log
---
Log file.
> __Note:__ Optional output.
